Role of men and women in Ramadan
Women are generally considered more religious than men. But do women get equal opportunities to develop their spiritual selves, get closer to God, or improve their devotional practices? In this essay, I address this question from the perspective of how Ramadan is observed in Muslim societies.

To foreground my discussion, I describe below some stereotypical notions about men and women.

For a long time in the West, men and women were presented as binary opposites. Women were associated with the body, fleshliness, emotion, etc and men with the soul, spirituality, and reason. Women's roles and responsibilities were determined by their relations with men, not with God. As Swiss-French philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712-78) put it:

"[Women's] education must be wholly directed to their relations with men. To give them pleasure, to be useful to them, to win their love and esteem, to train them in their childhood, to care for them when they grow up, to give them counsel and consolation, to make life sweet and agreeable for them: these are the tasks of women at all times for which they should be trained from childhood."


Read more
This Ramadan, let's reduce food waste
Rousseau's Emilius and Sophia (1763) contains many such ideas. In Britain, an entire genre of conduct books was devoted to inculcating such beliefs and values among women. They include James Fordyce's Sermons for the Young Women (1766), Hester Chapone's Letters on the Improvement of the Mind (1773), John Gregory's A Father's Legacy to His Daughters (1774), Thomas Gisborne's An Inquiry Into the Duty of the Female Sex (1797), and Jane West's Letters to a Young Lady (1811).

Mary Wollstonecraft's A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792) presented a detailed critique of such sexist ideas of Rousseau, Fordyce, Gregory and other philosophers.

Women's subservience to and their need to tailor their life to satisfy the needs of men were embedded in the Victorian psyche. European colonists spread such ideas in colonies and shaped indigenous gender ideologies and practices. Thus, many Victorian notions of women's status and roles entered Muslim societies and even gained a quasi-religious colouring.

In Islam, men's and women's roles and responsibilities are determined by their relation with God, not with the opposite gender. Obedience to humans is conditional to obedience to God. God has set certain boundaries which all believers are obligated to maintain and not to transgress. Moreover, in Islam, basic responsibilities of men and women are largely the same, and both genders are complementary to each other in leading a righteous life. The Qur'an (9:71) states, "The believing men and believing women are allies of one another. They enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong and establish prayer and give zakah and obey God and His Messenger. Those—God will have mercy upon them. Indeed, God is Exalted in Might and Wise."