When the air force transporter plane carrying Sheikh Hasina left Dhaka on August 5, it took off as a training flight and turned off its transponders to blur its flightpath and location.

The transponders, which transmit location, heading, altitude and speed, and the automatic geolocator system, were not turned on until the aircraft was close to Indian airspace in West Bengal, several sources told The Daily Star .

The Daily Star obtained a copy of flight AJAX1431's progress strip from air traffic control. The flight progress strip is a small card which the ATC use to track a certain plane in the air so that planes don't collide mid-air.

This paper also obtained a recording of the radio communications between the cockpit of the Lockheed C-130 Hercules aircraft and the ATC in Dhaka.

The flight progress strip shows that Hasina's plane took off from Dhaka's Bangabandhu Airbase, on the west of Hazrat Shahjalal International Airport, at 3:09pm.

government to seek extradition of Sheikh Hasina
Read more
The downfall of Sheikh Hasina, Bangladesh's 'Iron Lady
Just 30 minutes prior to this, tens of thousands of protesters took control of the Gono Bhaban, Hasina's then official residence.

Army chief Waker Uz Zaman was initially scheduled to address the nation at 2:00pm to formally announce Hasina's resignation. This was later postponed to 3:00pm, but he eventually made his address around 4:00pm.

In an interview with a New York-based nagoriktv.com in the last week of August, Waker said that he did not know that Hasina was flying away.

"When I was holding discussions with the political parties, somebody informed me that she is going to exit the country, she is on the run. I did not know that she was leaving the country. I think that if she had stayed, it could have been a risk to her life. Definitely, nobody would have wanted an extra-judicial killing to have happened. The situation was extremely volatile," he said.

The plane turned on its transponders and automatic geolocator system when it reached waypoint "BEMAK" on Dhaka-Kolkata route. The aircraft suddenly showed up on radar. It first headed towards Kolkata before changing course for Hindon Air Force base in Ghaziabad, 30km from the Indian capital, according to a screen grab of the radar screen at the Dhaka airport.

Aviation experts said that it was likely that the plane made the detour, by going towards Kolkata first instead of flying straight to Delhi, because it wanted to spend as little time as possible in Bangladesh airspace.

The Dhaka to Delhi route flies over Rajshahi and requires several minutes more in Bangladesh airspace than the Dhaka to Kolkata route.

Indian Foreign Affairs Minister S Jaishankar told the Rajya Sabha on August 6 that Hasina had sought approval to come to India on a "short notice".

According to the flight progress strip, Indian authorities were notified of the plane entering its airspace.