In her essay "Roshona Puja (Worship of the Tongue)," Begum Rokeya says, "Regrettably, in Ramadan the food frenzy among Muslims reaches the highest point. Instead of abstaining from the worldly activities and devoting oneself to heartfelt worship, the whole day is spent preparing for iftar [the evening meal for breaking the fast]. As a result, food intake [in Ramadan] increases instead of Muslims exercising restraint."

Muslims' food habit in Ramadan contradicts the spirit that should characterise the holy month. There is a tendency to prepare sumptuous and abundant food for iftar and sehri (pre-dawn meal). This results in a lavish gastronomic extravaganza, which in turn leads to food waste. Consequently, in most Muslim countries, the amount of food waste in Ramadan is much higher than it is outside the fasting month.

The food frenzy in Ramadan has gender implications because, in domestic life, women are expected to cook. Even though it is common knowledge that Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) performed household chores, not many Muslim men are eager to follow his example. Men expect women to prepare food and put it on the table for them.

In fact, like Muslim men, Muslim women need to get closer to God through increasing their devotional practices in Ramadan. However, if they have to spend long hours in the kitchen to fulfil the illogical culinary demands of family members, how can they engage in prayerful activities and devote more time to reading the Qur'an and performing other righteous deeds? By expecting Muslim women to shoulder the full burden of household chores, caregiving and other domestic responsibilities, Muslim men are turning away from the Prophet's teachings. By the way, if preparing iftar and sehri is a virtuous act, it is so for both Muslim men and women.

Transforming Ramadan from a month of fasting into one of feasting and then forcing women to cook extravagant iftar and sehri meals ruins the purpose of the holy month. During Ramadan and beyond, Muslims should organise family life in such a way that both men and women have equal opportunities to engage in devotional activities and achieve God consciousness.